---
title: "A Student's Perspective on Hacker News - Jacob Strieb"
author: Jacob Strieb
date: May 14, 2020
description: My favorite and least favorite parts of Hacker News through high school and college
...


# A Student's Perspective on Hacker News

By [Jacob Strieb](https://jstrieb.github.io)

Published on [May 14, 2020](/posts/hn-thoughts/)

---


Recently, I reached out to the moderators of [Hacker
News](https://news.ycombinator.com). After helping me, Daniel
([dang](https://news.ycombinator.com/user?id=dang)) -- the primary moderator --
noted that my profile lists me as a student and asked about my thoughts and
impressions of the site.[^1] I am indeed a student -- currently finishing my
junior year at Carnegie Mellon, though I started browsing Hacker News in the
middle of high school. I visit frequently because it tends to have the best
content related to my interests, so I have developed a lot of opinions. What
follows is my attempt to distill these as much as possible.

Put simply, I think Hacker News is pretty great. It has benefited me personally
and professionally; however, I have mixed feelings about the comments.

Hacker News's greatest virtue is it has helped me figure out what I haven't yet
learned, enabling me to fill in the gaps. Growing up, I lacked access to
computer science/programming mentorship. My public high school was devoid of
computer science classes, and before college I did not know anyone in the tech
industry. I'd been programming since I was young, but there were deficiencies
in my knowledge I didn't know existed. Hacker News allowed me to tap into the
collective vocabulary of mathematicians, computer scientists, and tech workers.
To this day, this lexicon guides my learning -- words I do not understand
become targets for further investigation. Moreover, my enhanced use of language
eases reading documentation and searching for solutions while coding. The
positive influence of Hacker News on my understanding of technical language
cannot be overstated, nor can the benefits of using technical language while
developing software, doing research, and communicating with technical people.

My regular readership also enabled me to contextualize much of what I'm now
learning in formal math and computer science classes. For example, systems
programming is more interesting and fulfilling for me than for many of my peers
because reading extensively about programming and computer history has made
seemingly-arbitrary, historic conventions feel natural. Broad exposure to
technical topics, facilitated by the overwhelming quantity of high-quality
content available on Hacker News, has ignited my passion and honed my
intuition. Conversely, taking advanced classes has tangibly enriched the
experience of browsing the site.

Beyond keeping me current on the latest and greatest in tech, Hacker News has
been a boon for me professionally. Last summer, I had a productive, fun, and
informative internship working at an early-stage Silicon Valley consumer
robotics startup founded by Y Combinator alumni. We connected via Y
Combinator's [Work at a Startup](https://www.workatastartup.com/internships/)
program, which I learned about through Hacker News. This summer, I will be
interning for a security company that I initially reached out to based on a
Hacker News "Who is Hiring" thread. I am confident that without Hacker News as
a means to find opportunities, I would not have access to these experiences. I
use my university's on-campus career services, but Hacker News and more
broadly, Y Combinator, are better equipped to help students find opportunities
at startups.

On the other hand, I feel jaded about tech work before I have even begun. I am
passionate about enriching society using software, so it feels inevitable that
I will enter the tech industry in some capacity. Reading others' critical
anecdotes can make me uneasy about unpleasant, seemingly ineluctable
professional experiences (ethically tenuous companies, "toxic environments,"
management onanism, ageism, grueling hiring processes, upcoming tech bubbles,
etc.), inspiring caution as I proceed. It remains to be seen whether the
cynicism and apprehension borne out of reading others' comments is for better,
or for worse.

Reading the praise and criticism offered by commenters has also informed my
understanding of best practices for tasks ranging from software development to
technical writing, and has guided me to the work of role models whose skill I
hope to emulate. Whether I agree or disagree with comments, they help me to
independently form my own opinions, and to understand the collective mentality
of the Hacker News demographic (to the extent such a common mentality exists,
anyway). Even individually unhelpful comments can be insightful in aggregate.

Anticipating how others will perceive my work based on this notion of a
collective opinion has shaped how I present my publicly-released projects.
Before publicizing my work on Hacker News, I idealistically expected the
comments to contain actionable directives for improvement, rather than
tangential but intriguing discussion. In reality, the commentary on my
(admittedly limited) popular work[^2] has been interesting, but hasn't directly
helped me improve; I have since adjusted my expectations. I now view releasing
work on Hacker News primarily as a means to share projects and inspire people,
and only incidentally as an opportunity to solicit personally helpful
commentary.

Despite some negative impressions, my feelings about Hacker News comments are
mixed overall because I love informative, insightful comments. In particular,
there is nothing more exciting than having the author of posted content
(whether OP or not) chime in with exclusive, behind-the-scenes information. I
recognize the number of people with a comment far outweighs the number with
insight. Top comments typically contain interesting perspective rarely found
anywhere else, which often supersedes less productive discussion below. Though
lamenting negativity and hypocrisy on Hacker News is common, users' votes
usually ensure toxicity is relegated to the bottom when present. Voters rather
than commenters on Hacker News are the silent majority, which tends to
successfully support good content and engaging discussion.

[^1]: Hacker News's moderation is stellar.
      [dang](https://news.ycombinator.com/user?id=dang) and
      [sctb](https://news.ycombinator.com/user?id=sctb) do a great job keeping
      things running smoothly! They also both seem like genuine, caring people.

[^2]: I am mostly thinking about a [post](/posts/digit-length/) that was
      discussed heavily [here](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=21500434).
      The commentary was productive, even though I wish there had been more
      discussion about my main point: connecting math and programming.

      I am also thinking of [URL Pages](http://github.com/jstrieb/urlpages),
      which was well-received considering it was a proof-of-concept. It was
      discussed [here](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=20317840).

